Hello everybody and welcome back in this lecture.
We are going to learn about vertex groups and how we can use them in the context of animation.
In this particular case we're setting ourselves up so that our model works universally both inside blender
and outside itself.
When we go ahead and export it's the first thing we need to do of course is learn all about vertex groups
and how we go ahead setting them up.
Well if I draw your attention to the properties panel on the right hand side and let's scroll down on
these tabs until we get to the icon that looks like an upside down triangle it's the object theta properties.
And this is where you can see vertex groups.
If I go ahead and click the plus we get a new group.
We can double click that and rename it.
In this case I'm going to name it base.
Now it doesn't really matter.
The order in which you do any of this.
This is just the way I'm doing it at the moment but you can do any of these steps in any order you want.
The next day I am going to do is turn on overlays so I can see what's going on.
I'm going to select my base and you go all the vertex group has gone so order does matter.
Make sure you've got the thing that you want to add to avert this group selected first.
And if we click on our plane on the back again we see that base is attached to that plane.
Let's undo that.
Let's come in.
Select in object mode first of all the base then go to vertex groups click the plus and let's call it
base.
Now is that done.
Do we need to do anything else.
The answer's yes.
Yes we do.
If we go ahead and select base it won't do anything at the moment because we're not in edit mode.
Now we get a few other options appearing now in order to assign a vertex to a vertex group.
You need to have them selected someone to press the A key to select everything.
And I'll turn on my screen capture keys there so you can see as well.
So with the achy pressed we know that we've selected all of those vertices and then we can go ahead
and assign those vertices to this base group based upon what is selected.
So just to make sure that that has worked I'm going to go Alton.
I declare my selection and then with base selected in the vertex groups panel I'm going to go select.
And there we go.
It's selected all of the vertices I had before.
So I'm happy with that selection so I'm going to lock it out of the way.
Now the next bits is the stem.
So once again you can go ahead.
Oh it's tempting to do that.
Isn't it just click plus to add your vertex group straight away.
No we don't want to do that.
We want to select the lamps them.
Then we can come back to our vertex groups and create the stem.
Well we've done that we can go in edit mode if everything is selected.
Great.
We can click a sign at these select read select looks good to me.
Of course then we lock it down so we're not going to accidentally make any changes to it.
And it's as simple as that to add things to a vertex group.
You can add things manually and much more precisely.
However for the level of control that we need this is absolutely perfect.
And now comes your challenge your challenge I'd like you to assign vertex groups to the rest of our
mesh objects join those mesh objects together where necessary name them appropriately as well.
In this instance what I'd like to do is keep the number of mesh objects the same as the number of bones
that you may even choose to name things the same as well just keep things steady.
So even though that we've got our base there and so far we've done the base and the lamp stem.
So there's a few more to do on top of that.
So go ahead pulls over here now and give that's a go okay.
Everybody welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and assign the rest of our vertex groups okay.
Welcome back.
So the next one is probably going to be the lower arm here.
So with it selected I'm going to go in straight away select all my vertices and call this lower arm
and I'm going to assign it select to select excellent working and we just repeat this for the rest of
what we have here.
Add a new call this upper arm and now we get the lampshade at the very top.
This is where we can start combining things together so upper arm.
That's fine I'm going to assign that these select select that's all working or I'm going to put locks
on these it's easy enough to unlock from later on as well.
But for the moment I'm happy so a couple of things to think about here before we go ahead and join things
together.
Anything that is unemployed so any unemployed transforms.
And it's also going to name itself whatever the active element was.
So since the lamp shave shade is basically what we want to work on.
I can come forward select each one individually and then the lamp shade last night I know I definitely
have the right things selected.
Now I can't make a busy curve straight into a mesh object if I try and join those things together.
It just doesn't work out so if I look for join it doesn't do anything.
We cannot join these two mesh objects to this curve object so we can convert it because obviously we
want to use it.
So with it selected we get EF 3 converts to and we're going to convert it to a mesh object.
And now we should really name it something.
So I'm going to call it lamp shade with a called lampshade.
I'm going to select my ball joint my SO going to select my ball joints my bulb and the lampshade control
and Jay enjoying them all together.
They're all under lampshade.
Excellent.
I'm going to go into edit mode and select everything.
I'm going to give myself a bit more space here and add a new vertex group called lampshade so let's
have a look at what we have here.
I'm going to open up the outline are a bit more in fact I'm going to hide this area for the moment so
I can work clearly so we've got our area lamps you armature and part of that is the lamp base looks
like we're using a path for that let's turn on and off yes then we got our lampshade lamps them lower
lower from an upper arm.
Now in this particular case we could almost apply that mirror when it came to the lower arm but I'm
gonna leave it where it is at the moment.
Okay brilliant.
So let's go through and just double check everything here that's maximize the space.
We've got one two three four five and we've got one two three four bones but we've also got this bone
on the bottom.
But if we think about it this bottom piece doesn't really move.
So what I'm going to do to make our model even simpler is join these two things together okay.
Brilliant.
Let's go ahead now and just make sure we've got the final.
But we she's just counting all the elements.
So if that car lampshade all combined with a bone we've got our upper arm with a bone which is great
we've got our lower arm with a bone as well.
And then finally we've got this stem and the base itself.
Now the question is whether or not we want to keep those as separate items I do otherwise we cannot
swivel around.
We can make it look like it's moving around.
Sure.
But the moment that you texted this or added something to it that made it unique.
The illusion that we've currently got will fade completely and it will just look rubbish but we'll cover
more of that in a later lecture.
I'm liking how my lamps coming along.
I've got all of my vertex groups sorted so we're one step closer to being able to export a single individual
model out of Blender that's animated into third party programs and we'll get to that really soon and
I'll see you all in the next lecture.